Turtles are reptiles of the order Chelonii[2] or Testudines characterised by a special bony or cartilaginous shell 
developed from their ribs and acting as a shield.[3] Turtle may refer to the chelonian order as a whole (American 
English) or to fresh-water and sea-dwelling chelonians (British English).

The order Chelonii or Testudines includes both extant (living) and extinct species. The earliest known turtles date 
from 220 million years ago,[5] making turtles one of the oldest reptile groups and a more ancient group than lizards, 
snakes or crocodiles. Of the many species alive today, some are highly endangered.

Like all other extant reptiles, turtles are ectotherms—their internal temperature varies according to the ambient 
environment, commonly called cold-blooded. However, because of their high metabolic rate, leatherback sea turtles have a
body temperature that is noticeably higher than that of the surrounding water.

Turtles are classified as amniotes, along with reptiles, dinosaurs (including birds), and mammals. Like other amniotes,
turtles breathe air and do not lay eggs underwater, although many species live in or around water.

The largest living chelonian is the leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), which reaches a shell length of 200 
cm (6.6 ft) and can reach a weight of over 900 kg (2,000 lb). Freshwater turtles are generally smaller, but with the 
largest species, the Asian softshell turtle Pelochelys cantorii, a few individuals have been reported up to 200 cm 
(6.6 ft). This dwarfs even the better-known alligator snapping turtle, the largest chelonian in North America, which 
attains a shell length of up to 80 cm (2.6 ft) and weighs as much as 113.4 kg (250 lb).[12] Giant tortoises of the 
genera Geochelone, Meiolania, and others were relatively widely distributed around the world into prehistoric times, and
 are known to have existed in North and South America, Australia, and Africa. They became extinct at the same time as 
the appearance of man, and it is assumed humans hunted them for food. The only surviving giant tortoises are on the 
Seychelles and Galápagos Islands, and can grow to over 130 cm (51 in) in length, and weigh about 300 kg (660 lb).